docs: adding jwt authentication tutorial (#980)
VeryGoodOpenSource/dart_frog: docs/docs/tutorials/jwt_authentication.md

```

Then, run the following command:

```bash
dart_frog dev
```

This will start the development server on port `8080`:

```
✓ Running on http://localhost:8080 (1.3s)
The Dart VM service is listening on http://127.0.0.1:8181/YKEF_nbwOpM=/
The Dart DevTools debugger and profiler is available at: http://127.0.0.1:8181/YKEF_nbwOpM=/devtools/#/?uri=ws%3A%2F%2F127.0.0.1%3A8181%2FYKEF_nbwOpM%3D%2Fws
[hotreload] Hot reload is enabled.
```

Make sure it's working by opening [http://localhost:8080](http://localhost:8080) in your browser or via `cURL`:

```bash
curl --request GET \
  --url http://localhost:8080
```

If everything succeeded, you should see `Welcome to Dart Frog!`.

## The hardcode domain code

To keep the tutorial simple and focused on authentication, our database of users will be hardcoded and
the `User` model will be simple, containing just an id and a name.

For next steps, use the code below to create the domain classes.

```dart
// lib/user.dart
class User {
  const User({
    required this.id,
    required this.name,
    required this.password,
  });

  final String id;
  final String name;
  final String password;
}
import 'package:authenticated_app/user.dart';

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

```dart
// lib/user.dart
```

there are many ways of implementing authentication in a backend, for this tutorial we will use a
hardcoded, in memory, database of users and [Json Web Tokens](https://jwt.io/) (or for short JWTs)
for the user's authentication token.

## Creating a new app

To create a new Dart Frog app, open your terminal, change to the directory where you'd like to create the app, and run the following command:

```bash
dart_frog create authenticated_app
```

You should see an output similar to:

```
✓ Creating authenticated_app (0.1s)
✓ Installing dependencies (1.7s)

Created authenticated_app at ./authenticated_app.

Get started by typing:

cd ./authenticated_app
dart_frog dev
```

:::tip
Install and use the [Dart Frog VS Code extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=VeryGoodVentures.dart-frog) to easily create Dart Frog apps within your IDE.
:::

## Running the development server

You should now have a directory called `authenticated_app`. Let's change directories into the newly created project:

```bash
cd authenticated_app
```

Then, run the following command:

```bash

> authenticated_app dev

Author: ```suggestion
dart_frog dev
```

```dart
// routes/sign_in.dart
import 'dart:io';

import 'package:authenticated_app/authenticator.dart';
import 'package:dart_frog/dart_frog.dart';

Future<Response> onRequest(RequestContext context) async {
  return switch (context.request.method) {
    HttpMethod.post => _onPost(context),
    _ => Future.value(
        Response(statusCode: HttpStatus.methodNotAllowed),
      ),
  };
}

Future<Response> _onPost(RequestContext context) async {
  final body = await context.request.json() as Map<String, dynamic>;
  final username = body['username'] as String?;
  final password = body['password'] as String?;

  if (username == null || password == null) {
    return Response(statusCode: HttpStatus.badRequest);
  }

  final authenticator = context.read<Authenticator>();

  final user = authenticator.findByUsernameAndPassword(
    username: username,
    password: password,
  );

  if (user == null) {
    return Response(statusCode: HttpStatus.unauthorized);
  } else {
    return Response.json(
      body: { 'token': username },
    );
  }
}
```

To people familiar with Dart Frog, the code above should be no real challenge, we are simply handling the
request in the following steps:

> - Check with we have all the info needed, returning `badRequest` otherwise.

Author: ```suggestion
- Check if we have all the info needed, returning `badRequest` otherwise.
```

- Get our `Authenticator` dependency from our dependency injection.
- User the authenticator to get a user that match the request's credential.

> - Returns `unauthorized` (401) if there is no user, or returns the the user username as the authentication token otherwise.

Author: ```suggestion
- Returns `unauthorized` (401) if there is no user, or returns the user username as the authentication token otherwise.
```

But wait, you could be thinking that using the user username as an authentication token is quite unsafe.
And for sure it is, but for now, let's just for the sake of simplicity, for now lets go with that
in order to finish our authentication setup before introducing more complex security methods.

Try now running a `curl` in the terminal to get a token:

```bash
curl -X POST \
     -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
     -d '{"username": "john", "password": "123"}'  \
     http://localhost:8080/sign_in

# {"token":"john"}
```

## Requiring authentication to access routes

> Now that we have the means to get an authentication token, we can now protect routes to require that a token
> is provided.

Author: ```suggestion
Now that we have the means to get an authentication token, we can now protect routes to require a token
to be provided in
order to access them.
```

To start lets create the following route:

```dart
// routes/tasks/index.dart
import 'dart:io';

import 'package:dart_frog/dart_frog.dart';

Future<Response> onRequest(RequestContext context) {
  return switch (context.request.method) {
    HttpMethod.post => _onPost(context),
    _ => Future.value(Response(statusCode: HttpStatus.methodNotAllowed)),
  };
}

Future<Response> _onPost(RequestContext context) async {
  final task = await context.request.body();
  return Response.json(
    body: {
      'recorded_task': task,
    },
  );
}
```

> This routes doesn't do much for now, it just reads the request and answers with a body with the

Author: ```suggestion
This route doesn't do much for now, it just reads the request and answers with a body with the
```

package provided by Dart Frog that makes it easier to implement token based authentications.

So lets start by adding it to the project:

```bash
dart pub add dart_frog_auth
```

First, we need to create a method in our authenticator class which will be responsible to validate
an authentication token, since right now, our authentication token is just the user's username,
we can add the following snippet to the `Authenticator` class:

```dart
  User? verifyToken(String username) {
    return _users[username];
  }
```

If the token is valid, the user will be returned, otherwise, the method will return `null`.

Next, lets create the following middleware under `routes/tasks`:

```dart
import 'package:authenticated_app/authenticator.dart';
import 'package:authenticated_app/user.dart';
import 'package:dart_frog/dart_frog.dart';
import 'package:dart_frog_auth/dart_frog_auth.dart';

Handler middleware(Handler handler) {
  return handler.use(
    bearerAuthentication<User>(
      authenticator: (context, token) async {
        final authenticator = context.read<Authenticator>();
        return authenticator.verifyToken(token);
      },
    ),
  );
}
```

> What this middle does, is to add a Bearer token authentication checking to all requests coming

Author: ```suggestion
What this middleware does, is to add a Bearer token authentication checking to all requests coming
```

into the routes of that namespace.

The usage of `bearerAuthentication` middleware, which is provided by `dart_frog_auth` is quite simple.
We simply need to inform the a function to the `bearerAuthentication` attribute, this function receives
the current `RequestContext` and the token that was passed in the request.

If the token is valid and belongs to a user, the function must return that user. Otherwise,
it should return null.

> This middleware will automatically return `unauthorized` response to incoming requests where

Author: ```suggestion
This middleware will automatically return `unauthorized` response to incoming requests when
```

But if we inform a valid and correct authentication token:

```bash
curl -d "Buy bread" \
     -v \
     -H "Authorization: Bearer john" \
     http://localhost:8080/tasks
```

The correct response of that route should be output:

```bash
{"recorded_task":"Buy bread"}
```

Additionally, the `bearerAuthentication` middleware will set the returned user in the request context,
so any route handlers affected by it, will have access to the user that is currently authenticated.

With that information, we can change our tasks routes to have a more interesting response:

```dart
import 'dart:io';

import 'package:authenticated_app/user.dart';
import 'package:dart_frog/dart_frog.dart';

Future<Response> onRequest(RequestContext context) {
  return switch (context.request.method) {
    HttpMethod.post => _onPost(context),
    _ => Future.value(Response(statusCode: HttpStatus.methodNotAllowed)),
  };
}

Future<Response> _onPost(RequestContext context) async {
  final task = await context.request.body();
  final user = context.read<User>();

  return Response.json(
    body: {
      'recorded_task': task,
      'user_id': user.id,
    },
  );
}
```

## Protecting the authentication token

> This is a good step to review what we have done so far:

Author: ```suggestion
This is a good point to review what we have done so far:
```

- We have created a sign in route, where credentials can be posted, and an authentication token

>   is returned.

Author: ```suggestion
  is returned if valid.
```

> - We have routes that can only accessed if an authentication token is sent in the request.

Author: ```suggestion
- We have routes that can only be accessed if an authentication token is sent in the request.
```

> But like we noticed in the steps above, our authentication token is quite unsafe, it is nothing

Author: ```suggestion
But like we noticed in the steps before, our authentication token is quite unsafe, it is nothing
```

more than the user's username, meaning that if an ill intentioned person guesses another user's

> username, which is not something hard to do, they could pass as that user, and maybe steal

Author: ```suggestion
username, which is not something hard to do, they could pass as that user and maybe steal
```

information or other bad actions.

> To avoid that, we to make our tokens in a way where they cannot be faked, guessed or tampered.

Author: ```suggestion
To avoid that, we have to make our tokens in a way where they cannot be faked, guessed or tampered.
```

> There are many ways of doing that, in this tutorial, we will JWT, a widely used standard in the

Author: ```suggestion
There are many ways of doing that, in this tutorial, we will use JWT, a widely used standard in the
```

industry to secure issued tokens. This tutorial will not go much in deep on how JWT tokens work

> under the hood, so to get a better understanding of how they work, be sure to check their official

Author: ```suggestion
under the hood, so to get a better understanding on how they work, be sure to check their official
```

[documentation](https://jwt.io/).

Right, with that brief introduction, lets get that done. Luckily, the Dart ecosystem already have
a handy package that makes it easy to work with JWT tokens, lets start by adding that dependency to our
project:

```dart
dart pub add dart_jsonwebtoken
```

Next, lets add the following method to our `Authenticator` class:

```dart
  String generateToken({
    required String username,
    required User user,
  }) {
    final jwt = JWT(
      {
        'id': user.id,
        'name': user.name,
        'username': username,
      },
    );

    return jwt.sign(SecretKey('123'));
  }
```

That will take care of generating a JWT token. Note that we call a method `sign` out of the token,
passing a secret key, as the name implies, this key is secret and should be kept as such, in this
tutorial we are keeping it hard coded for the sake of simplicity, but in a real case application,

> be sure to correctly store it.

Author: ```suggestion
be sure to correctly store it and pass it to the code in a way where then will remain secret to outsiders.
```

The sign method will create a signature out of the data we passed to it, that signature will be part
of the token and will later on allow us to check if an authentication token that we've received
is valid and if hasn't been tampered!

> Alright, now we need to make a small change in our sign in route, as it should not return the token
> create by this method instead, the route will now look like this:

Author: ```suggestion
Alright, now we need to make a small change in our sign in route, as it should not return the username
anymore, but rather the token created by this method instead. The route will now look like this:
```

    'jack': User(
      id: '2',
      name: 'Jack',
      password: '321',
    ),
  };

  static const _passwords = {
    // ⚠️ Never store user's password in plain text, these values are in plain text
    // just for the sake of the tutorial.
    'john': '123',
    'jack': '321',
  };

  User? findByUsernameAndPassword({
    required String username,
    required String password,
  }) {
    final user = _users[username];

    if (user != null && _passwords[username] == password) {
      return user;
    }

    return null;
  }
}

```

We also need to provide our `Authenticator` to our routes. Since it will be used by
several routes like a sign in and all the routes that are authenticated, it makes sense to
provide it to all routes.

In order to do so, we can use [Dart frog's dependency injection](https://dartfrog.vgv.dev/docs/basics/dependency-injection)
and create a middleware in the root of our `routes` folder with the following code:

```dart
import 'package:authenticated_app/authenticator.dart';
import 'package:dart_frog/dart_frog.dart';

Handler middleware(Handler handler) {
  return handler.use(
    provider<Authenticator>(
      (_) => Authenticator(),
    ),
  );
}
```

> ## Writing a Sign In route

Author: I have mentioned the IDE extension above already, do you think we should add it again here?

# {"token":"john"}
```

## Requiring authentication to access routes

Now that we have the means to get an authentication token, we can now protect routes to require a token
to be provided in
order to access them.

To start lets create the following route:

```dart
// routes/tasks/index.dart
import 'dart:io';

import 'package:dart_frog/dart_frog.dart';

Future<Response> onRequest(RequestContext context) {
  return switch (context.request.method) {
    HttpMethod.post => _onPost(context),
    _ => Future.value(Response(statusCode: HttpStatus.methodNotAllowed)),
  };
}

Future<Response> _onPost(RequestContext context) async {
  final task = await context.request.body();
  return Response.json(
    body: {
      'recorded_task': task,
    },
  );
}
```

This route doesn't do much for now, it just reads the request and answers with a body with the
received task name. Also it isn't yet protected.

To protect our route, we will use [`dart_frog_auth`](https://pub.dev/packages/dart_frog_auth), a
package provided by Dart Frog that makes it easier to implement token based authentications.

So lets start by adding it to the project:

```bash
dart pub add dart_frog_auth
```

> First, we need to create a method in our authenticator class which will be responsible to validate
> an authentication token, since right now, our authentication token is just the user's username,
> we can add the following snippet to the `Authenticator` class:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, we need to create a method in our `Authenticator` class which will be responsible of validating
an authentication token. Since for now, our authentication token is just the user's username,
we can add the following snippet to the `Authenticator` class:
```

```dart
  User? verifyToken(String username) {
    return _users[username];
  }
```

If the token is valid, the user will be returned, otherwise, the method will return `null`.

Next, lets create the following middleware under `routes/tasks`:

```dart

> import 'package:authenticated_app/authenticator.dart';

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// lib/routes/tasks/_middleware.dart
import 'package:authenticated_app/authenticator.dart';
```

import 'package:authenticated_app/user.dart';
import 'package:dart_frog/dart_frog.dart';
import 'package:dart_frog_auth/dart_frog_auth.dart';

Handler middleware(Handler handler) {
  return handler.use(
    bearerAuthentication<User>(
      authenticator: (context, token) async {
        final authenticator = context.read<Authenticator>();
        return authenticator.verifyToken(token);
      },
    ),
  );
}
```

> What this middleware does, is to add a Bearer token authentication checking to all requests incoming
> into the routes of that namespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This middleware is adding Bearer token authentication for all requests incoming within the `tasks` namespace.
```

> The usage of `bearerAuthentication` middleware, which is provided by `dart_frog_auth` is quite simple.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The usage of `bearerAuthentication` middleware, which is provided by `dart_frog_auth`, is quite simple.
```

> We simply need to inform the a function to the `bearerAuthentication` attribute, this function receives
> the current `RequestContext` and the token that was passed in the request.
> 
> If the token is valid and belongs to a user, the function must return that user. Otherwise,
> it should return null.

Reviewer: Adjusted to avoid using "simply" twice:

```suggestion
We need to provide a function that returns a user if the token is valid and belongs to a user; or null otherwise.
```

> This middleware will automatically return `unauthorized` response to incoming requests when
> no valid tokens are provided, so if we go ahead and try the following command in our terminal:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This middleware will automatically return an `unauthorized` (401) response to incoming requests when
no valid tokens are provided. So, if we go ahead and try the following command in our terminal:
```

```bash
# Note the additional `-v`, so we can see the status code in the output
curl -d "Buy bread" \
     -v \
     http://localhost:8080/tasks
```

> We should see the following line in the output

Reviewer: Including ":" for consitency with the following line.

```suggestion
We should see the following line in the output:
```

```bash
< HTTP/1.1 401 Unauthorized
```

But if we inform a valid and correct authentication token:

```bash
curl -d "Buy bread" \
     -v \
     -H "Authorization: Bearer john" \
     http://localhost:8080/tasks
```

> The correct response of that route should be output:

Reviewer: Including "the" for consistency with the previous line.

```suggestion
The correct response of that route should be the output:
```

```bash
{"recorded_task":"Buy bread"}
```

> Additionally, the `bearerAuthentication` middleware will set the returned user in the request context,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, the `bearerAuthentication` middleware will provide the returned user in the request context,
```

> so any route handlers affected by it, will have access to the user that is currently authenticated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
so any route handlers affected by it, will already have access to the user that is currently authenticated.
```

With that information, we can change our tasks routes to have a more interesting response:

```dart

> import 'dart:io';

Reviewer: We should include the file name as a comment here to.

import 'package:authenticated_app/user.dart';
import 'package:dart_frog/dart_frog.dart';

Future<Response> onRequest(RequestContext context) {
  return switch (context.request.method) {
    HttpMethod.post => _onPost(context),
    _ => Future.value(Response(statusCode: HttpStatus.methodNotAllowed)),
  };
}

Future<Response> _onPost(RequestContext context) async {
  final task = await context.request.body();
  final user = context.read<User>();

  return Response.json(
    body: {
      'recorded_task': task,
      'user_id': user.id,
    },
  );
}
```

## Protecting the authentication token

This is a good point to review what we have done so far:

- We have created a sign in route, where credentials can be posted, and an authentication token
  is returned if valid.
- We have routes that can only be accessed if an authentication token is sent in the request.

> But like we noticed in the steps before, our authentication token is quite unsafe, it is nothing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, as we noticed in the steps before, our authentication token is quite unsafe, it is nothing
```

> more than the user's username, meaning that if an ill intentioned person guesses another user's

Reviewer: ```suggestion
more than the user's username. Meaning that if a malicious hacker guesses another user's
```

> username, which is not something hard to do, they could pass as that user and maybe steal
> information or other bad actions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
username, which is not something hard to do. This would allow the hacker to impersonate the user and perform bad actions, such as stealing information.
```

To avoid that, we have to make our tokens in a way where they cannot be faked, guessed or tampered.

> There are many ways of doing that, in this tutorial, we will use JWT, a widely used standard in the

Reviewer: Suggestion to avoid repeating "way" again (used in the precious sentence) and "that":

```suggestion
There are many methods of doing so, in this tutorial, we will use JWT, a widely used standard in the
```

industry to secure issued tokens. This tutorial will not go much in deep on how JWT tokens work
under the hood, so to get a better understanding on how they work, be sure to check their official
[documentation](https://jwt.io/).

> Right, with that brief introduction, lets get that done. Luckily, the Dart ecosystem already have

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Right, given this brief introduction, let's get to it! Luckily, the Dart ecosystem already has
```

> a handy package that makes it easy to work with JWT tokens, lets start by adding that dependency to our

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a handy package that makes it easy to work with JWT tokens. We can start by adding that dependency to our
```

project:

```dart

> dart pub add dart_jsonwebtoken

Reviewer: This package doesn't seem to have a single test, are we sure we want to recommend it?

Author: urg, that is unfortunate, the package was so easy to use, thanks for looking into that. I will look for an alternative, and replace if I find any.

Author: As discussed async, even though that is the truth, this is a solid package and it is so easy to use, which makes it perfect for a tutorial, where we don't want to complicate things if not needed, so we will go with this package, and hopefully contribute to the package adding tests to it.

```

> Next, lets add the following method to our `Authenticator` class:

Reviewer: I think we are overusing "let's" a bit:

```suggestion
Next, add the following method to our `Authenticator` class:
```

```dart
  String generateToken({
    required String username,
    required User user,
  }) {
    final jwt = JWT(
      {
        'id': user.id,
        'name': user.name,
        'username': username,
      },
    );

    return jwt.sign(SecretKey('123'));
  }
```

> That will take care of generating a JWT token. Note that we call a method `sign` out of the token,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This new method takes care of generating a JWT token. Note that we `sign` out the token by
```

> passing a secret key, as the name implies, this key is secret and should be kept as such, in this
> tutorial we are keeping it hard coded for the sake of simplicity, but in a real case application,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
passing a secret key, as the name implies, this key is secret and should be kept as such. For the scope of this
tutorial we are keeping it hard coded. Nonetheless, in a real case application,
```

> be sure to correctly store it and pass it to the code in a way where then will remain secret to outsiders.

Reviewer: Would working with environments (https://dartfrog.vgv.dev/docs/basics/environments) work? If so, should we link to it?

> The sign method will create a signature out of the data we passed to it, that signature will be part
> of the token and will later on allow us to check if an authentication token that we've received
> is valid and if hasn't been tampered!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `sign` method will create a signature out of the data we passed to it, ant it will be part
of the token. This technique will allow us to check if an authentication token that we've received
is valid and if it hasn't been tampered!
```

> Alright, now we need to make a small change in our sign in route, as it should not return the username
> anymore, but rather the token created by this method instead. The route will now look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alright, now we need update our `/sign_in` route. It should no longer return the user's username
anymore, but instead, the token created by the `generateToken` method. The route should now look like this:
```

```dart

> import 'dart:io';

Reviewer: We should include the file name as a comment here to.

import 'package:authenticated_app/authenticator.dart';
import 'package:dart_frog/dart_frog.dart';

Future<Response> onRequest(RequestContext context) async {
  return switch (context.request.method) {
    HttpMethod.post => _onPost(context),
    _ => Future.value(
        Response(statusCode: HttpStatus.methodNotAllowed),
      ),
  };
}

Future<Response> _onPost(RequestContext context) async {
  final body = await context.request.json() as Map<String, dynamic>;
  final username = body['username'] as String?;
  final password = body['password'] as String?;

  if (username == null || password == null) {
    return Response(statusCode: HttpStatus.badRequest);
  }

  final authenticator = context.read<Authenticator>();

  final user = authenticator.findByUsernameAndPassword(
    username: username,
    password: password,
  );

  if (user == null) {
    return Response(statusCode: HttpStatus.unauthorized);
  } else {
    return Response.json(
      body: {
        'token': authenticator.generateToken(
          username: username,
          user: user,
        ),
      },
    );
  }
}
```

> Finally, we now need to change the `Authenticator` to verify the signed token instead of just
> checking if there is a user with the username.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, we now need to change the `Authenticator` to verify the newly signed token, instead of just
checking against a user's username.
```

```dart
  User? verifyToken(String token) {
    try {
      final payload = JWT.verify(
        token,
        SecretKey('123'),
      );

      final payloadData = payload.payload as Map<String, dynamic>;

      final username = payloadData['username'] as String;
      return _users[username];
    } catch (e) {
      return null;
    }
  }
```

> And that is it, with the addition of a signed token if someone tamper the information stored in it,
> or try to forge a token without knowing the secret key, the authentication will fail and only real,
> authenticated users will be able to access protected routes!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And that is it, with the addition of a signed token, if someone tampers the information stored in it,
or tries to forge a token without knowing the secret key, the authentication will fail; only real authenticated users will be able to access protected routes!
```

---
sidebar_position: 6
title: 🪪  Authentication with JWT
description: Build an authenticated dart frog service.
---

# Authentication with JWT 🪪

:::info
**Difficulty**: 🟠 Intermediate<br/>
**Length**: 30 minutes

Before getting started, [read the Dart Frog prerequisites](/docs/overview#prerequisites) to make sure your development environment is ready.
:::

## Overview

In this tutorial, we're going to build an app that exposes endpoints accessible only to users
that have been authenticated.

When we're done, we should be able to authenticate with a user credentials, and access the
protected routes.

Like mentioned in the [Dart Frog Authentication documentation](https://dartfrog.vgv.dev/docs/advanced/authentication),
there are many ways of implementing authentication in a backend, for this tutorial we will use a

> hardcoded, in memory, database of users and [Json Web Tokens](https://jwt.io/) (or for short JWTs)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
hardcoded, in memory, database of users and [JSON Web Tokens](https://jwt.io/) (or for short JWTs)
```

```bash
cd authenticated_app
```

Then, run the following command:

```bash
dart_frog dev
```

This will start the development server on port `8080`:

```
✓ Running on http://localhost:8080 (1.3s)
The Dart VM service is listening on http://127.0.0.1:8181/YKEF_nbwOpM=/
The Dart DevTools debugger and profiler is available at: http://127.0.0.1:8181/YKEF_nbwOpM=/devtools/#/?uri=ws%3A%2F%2F127.0.0.1%3A8181%2FYKEF_nbwOpM%3D%2Fws
[hotreload] Hot reload is enabled.
```

Make sure it's working by opening [http://localhost:8080](http://localhost:8080) in your browser or via `cURL`:

```bash
curl --request GET \
  --url http://localhost:8080
```

If everything succeeded, you should see `Welcome to Dart Frog!`.

## The hardcode domain code

To keep the tutorial simple and focused on authentication, our database of users will be hardcoded and
the `User` model will be simple, containing just an id and a name.

For next steps, use the code below to create the domain classes.

```dart
// lib/user.dart
class User {
  const User({
    required this.id,
    required this.name,
    required this.password,
  });

  final String id;
  final String name;
  final String password;
}

> import 'package:authenticated_app/user.dart';

Reviewer 3: Why is the import in the bottom?

Author: because it is wrong 😅 , I've fixed

      password: '123',
    ),
    'jack': User(
      id: '2',
      name: 'Jack',
      password: '321',
    ),
  };

  static const _passwords = {
    // ⚠️ Never store user's password in plain text, these values are in plain text
    // just for the sake of the tutorial.
    'john': '123',
    'jack': '321',
  };

  User? findByUsernameAndPassword({
    required String username,
    required String password,
  }) {
    final user = _users[username];

    if (user != null && _passwords[username] == password) {
      return user;
    }

    return null;
  }
}

```

We also need to provide our `Authenticator` to our routes. It will be used by the sign in route and all others that
require authentication.

In order to do so, we can use [Dart frog's dependency injection](https://dartfrog.vgv.dev/docs/basics/dependency-injection)
and create a middleware in the root of our `routes` folder with the following code:

```dart
// lib/_middleware.dart
import 'package:authenticated_app/authenticator.dart';
import 'package:dart_frog/dart_frog.dart';

Handler middleware(Handler handler) {
  return handler.use(
    provider<Authenticator>(
      (_) => Authenticator(),
    ),
  );
}
```

:::tip

> Install and use the [Dart Frog VS Code extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=VeryGoodVentures.dart-frog) to easily create new middleware within your IDE.

Reviewer 2: Cant we have a single tip that mentions it all?

Author: @alestiago this was your suggestion haha, argue for it

Reviewer 2: My reasoning is this: its a good tip but imho should be right after the intro to explain that it makes everything easier (if u use vscode) but it does not add "tip" value to the related content.

As a developer I rather see tips for the content I am reading then 3 or 4 times an ad for a different product

Reviewer: Thanks @erickzanardo for tagging me here. I think @wolfenrain is raising a valid concern, but I do have a slight preference to the current approach. I'll chat with @wolfenrain off Git-Hub to see what action we should take here 😝 . 

Personally, I think we can resolve this conversation if it is blocking this Pull Request. Committing to adding an intro that mentions everything can be made easier with the extension (as suggested by @wolfenrain), will impact all other tutorials since they currently follow the the explicit tip-approach. This means that, for consistency, we'll have to update all other tutorials and I think that can be a standalone change to avoid polluting this Pull Request.

  final body = await context.request.json() as Map<String, dynamic>;
  final username = body['username'] as String?;
  final password = body['password'] as String?;

  if (username == null || password == null) {
    return Response(statusCode: HttpStatus.badRequest);
  }

  final authenticator = context.read<Authenticator>();

  final user = authenticator.findByUsernameAndPassword(
    username: username,
    password: password,
  );

  if (user == null) {
    return Response(statusCode: HttpStatus.unauthorized);
  } else {
    return Response.json(
      body: { 'token': username },
    );
  }
}
```

:::tip
Install and use the [Dart Frog VS Code extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=VeryGoodVentures.dart-frog) to easily create new routes within your IDE.
:::

To people familiar with Dart Frog, the code above should be no real challenge, we are simply handling the
request in the following steps:

- Check if we have all the info needed, returning `badRequest` otherwise.
- Get our `Authenticator` dependency from our dependency injection.
- Use the `Authenticator` to get a user that match the request's credential.

> - Returns `unauthorized` (401) if there is no user, or returns the user username as the authentication token otherwise.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Return an `unauthorized` (401) if there is no user, or return the user username as the authentication token otherwise.
```

Present tense?

> Using the user's username as an authentication token is quite unsafe. Malicious hackers could easily modify messages with usernames to break through our security and impersonate someone else. For the sake of simplicity, we'll finish off using this simple authentication setup before introducing JWT, a more complex security method.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using the username as an authentication token is quite unsafe. Malicious hackers could easily modify messages with usernames to break through our security and impersonate someone else. For the sake of simplicity, we'll finish off using this simple authentication setup before introducing JWT, a more complex security method.
```

It is implied :P

To start, let's create the following route:

```dart
// routes/tasks/index.dart
import 'dart:io';

import 'package:dart_frog/dart_frog.dart';

Future<Response> onRequest(RequestContext context) {
  return switch (context.request.method) {
    HttpMethod.post => _onPost(context),
    _ => Future.value(Response(statusCode: HttpStatus.methodNotAllowed)),
  };
}

Future<Response> _onPost(RequestContext context) async {
  final task = await context.request.body();
  return Response.json(
    body: {
      'recorded_task': task,
    },
  );
}
```

This route doesn't do much for now, it just reads the request and answers with a body that includes the
received task name. In addition, it is yet to be protected.

To protect our route, we will use [`dart_frog_auth`](https://pub.dev/packages/dart_frog_auth), a
package provided by Dart Frog that makes it easier to implement token based authentications.

So let's start by adding it to the project:

```bash
dart pub add dart_frog_auth
```

First, we need to create a method in our `Authenticator` class which will be responsible of validating

> an authentication token. Since for now, our authentication token is just the user's username,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
an authentication token. Since for now, our authentication token is just the username,
```

we can add the following snippet to the `Authenticator` class:

```dart
  User? verifyToken(String username) {
    return _users[username];
  }
```

If the token is valid, the user will be returned, otherwise, the method will return `null`.

Next, lets create the following middleware under `routes/tasks`:

```dart
// lib/routes/tasks/_middleware.dart
import 'package:authenticated_app/authenticator.dart';
import 'package:authenticated_app/user.dart';
import 'package:dart_frog/dart_frog.dart';
import 'package:dart_frog_auth/dart_frog_auth.dart';

Handler middleware(Handler handler) {
  return handler.use(
    bearerAuthentication<User>(
      authenticator: (context, token) async {
        final authenticator = context.read<Authenticator>();
        return authenticator.verifyToken(token);
      },
    ),
  );
}
```

> This middleware is adding Bearer token authentication for all requests incoming within the `tasks` namespace.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This middleware is adding a Bearer Token authentication for all requests incoming within the `tasks` namespace.
```

> The usage of `bearerAuthentication` middleware, which is provided by `dart_frog_auth`, is quite simple.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The usage of the `bearerAuthentication` middleware, which is provided by `dart_frog_auth`, is quite simple.
```

We need to provide a function that returns a user if the token is valid and belongs to a user; or null otherwise.

This middleware will automatically return an `unauthorized` (401) response to incoming requests when
no valid tokens are provided. So, if we go ahead and try the following command in our terminal:

```bash
# Note the additional `-v`, so we can see the status code in the output
curl -d "Buy bread" \
     -v \
     http://localhost:8080/tasks
```

We should see the following line in the output:

```bash
< HTTP/1.1 401 Unauthorized
```

But if we inform a valid and correct authentication token:

```bash
curl -d "Buy bread" \
     -v \
     -H "Authorization: Bearer john" \
     http://localhost:8080/tasks
```

> The correct response of that route should be the output:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then the correct response of that route should be the output:
```

?

With that information, we can change our tasks routes to have a more interesting response:

```dart
// routes/tasks/index.dart
import 'dart:io';

import 'package:authenticated_app/user.dart';
import 'package:dart_frog/dart_frog.dart';

Future<Response> onRequest(RequestContext context) {
  return switch (context.request.method) {
    HttpMethod.post => _onPost(context),
    _ => Future.value(Response(statusCode: HttpStatus.methodNotAllowed)),
  };
}

Future<Response> _onPost(RequestContext context) async {
  final task = await context.request.body();
  final user = context.read<User>();

  return Response.json(
    body: {
      'recorded_task': task,
      'user_id': user.id,
    },
  );
}
```

## Protecting the authentication token

This is a good point to review what we have done so far:

- We have created a sign in route, where credentials can be posted, and an authentication token
  is returned if valid.
- We have routes that can only be accessed if an authentication token is sent in the request.

However, as we noticed in the steps before, our authentication token is quite unsafe, it is nothing

> more than the user's username. Meaning that if a malicious hacker guesses another user's

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
more than the username. Meaning that if a malicious hacker guesses another
```

  }

  final authenticator = context.read<Authenticator>();

  final user = authenticator.findByUsernameAndPassword(
    username: username,
    password: password,
  );

  if (user == null) {
    return Response(statusCode: HttpStatus.unauthorized);
  } else {
    return Response.json(
      body: {
        'token': authenticator.generateToken(
          username: username,
          user: user,
        ),
      },
    );
  }
}
```

Finally, we now need to change the `Authenticator` to verify the newly signed token, instead of just
checking against a user's username.

```dart
  User? verifyToken(String token) {
    try {
      final payload = JWT.verify(
        token,
        SecretKey('123'),
      );

      final payloadData = payload.payload as Map<String, dynamic>;

      final username = payloadData['username'] as String;
      return _users[username];
    } catch (e) {
      return null;
    }
  }
```

And that is it, with the addition of a signed token, if someone tampers the information stored in it,
or tries to forge a token without knowing the secret key, the authentication will fail; only real authenticated users will be able to access protected routes!

> 🎉 Congrats, you've created an application using Dart Frog with authentication.

Reviewer 2: nit: congratulations

Author: ```suggestion
🎉 Congratulations, you've created an application using Dart Frog with authentication.
```
